#start Section-1

url39 url6

#end Section-1

#start Section-2

Assess the effectiveness of legal and non-legal responses to homelessness.


Homelessness can range from being absolutely without shelter, to having shelter but only of an insecure, incomplete kind. The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) defines a person as homeless if they do not have suitable accommodation alternatives and their current living arrangement: is in a dwelling that is inadequate, has no tenure, or if their initial tenure is short and not extendable, or does not allow them to have control of, and access to space for social relations. The ABS found that on any given night in Australia 1 in 200 people are homeless. Therefore, the legal system and society should act to reduce this figure as shelter is basic human need.

Both the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in Article 25 and Article 11 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights state that “everyone has the right to a standard of living for himself and his family, including adequate food, clothing and housing”. Although, this statement is only a recommendation as international declarations and covenants are known as ‘soft’ international law, meaning they only impose moral obligations to ratify them, unlike treaties. Due to state sovereignty, the Government is able to govern the country however it pleases, therefore the rights to shelter under international law do not have any impact.

It is outlined in Section 51 of the Australian Constitution that State governments have exclusive powers to make laws on housing, whilst the Federal Government has residual powers. There are no significant differences between the housing policies of the two major political parties. The Coalition encourages private ownership by making laws to protect home buyers. The Australian Labour Party (ALP) have also facilitated private ownership by building up the numbers of homes available and assisting those who cannot afford to buy, particularly by increasing the amount of money on offer under the First Home Owner Grant (FHOG). Although, the FHOG scheme was only introduced to offset the effect of the GST on home ownership.

Most Commonwealth funding for the homelessness sector is provided through the states and territories under two Council of Australian Governments (COAG) agreements: the National Affordable Housing Agreement (NAHA) and the National Partnership Agreement on Homelessness (NPAH). They are both in place to achieve sustainable housing and social inclusion for people who are homeless or at risk of homelessness, despite the two agreements’ structure and purposes being quite different.

The NAHA is a high-level document that sets out an objective, outcomes, outputs, roles and responsibilities, reform and policy directions. It aims that all Australians have access to affordable, safe and sustainable housing that contributes to social and economic participation. Its funding is provided from the Commonwealth Government. This is a Specific Purpose Payment and states are not required to match the federal funding. The COAG reviewed the NAHA in December 2013. COAG found that there was a funding shortfall because funding is indexed according to growth parameters, which resulted in below-CPI indexing. Furthermore, specific performance indicators are difficult to measure due to lack of clarity between outcome measures and reform activities. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the effectiveness of the NAHA. It is clear that it makes an effort to protect individuals’ rights to shelter through funding, but this short-fall in funding definitely limits its effectiveness.

The NPAH provides additional funding for agreed activities. It requires specific state and territory implementation plans with joint funding from the Commonwealth and each state and territory. Since, 2009 the NPAH has funded 180 new or improved services, driven innovation, produced new service models, and built capacity. Many of these have been smart, local responses that focus on early intervention. Clearly it has been effective in protecting individual rights and increasing access to shelter; reducing homelessness. The Government also believed this, announcing a two-year extension in March 2015, for $115m annually (unindexed), to expire in June 2017.

The Household Organisational Management Expenses (HOME) Advice Programs is an early intervention program aimed at assisting families at risk of homelessness due to personal or financial circumstances. The HOME Advice program funds a community organisation and a Centrelink social worker in each state and territory, who work collaboratively to assist families at risk of homelessness to manage their financial and household expenses in order to prevent future accommodation crisis. A 2007 review found that 92% of families avoided homelessness and remained in their homes or improved their housing. 93% of families had their immediate financial crisis resolved; and 93% of families improved their debt situation with 66% reducing or totally wiping their debt and, 31% stabilising their debt. Therefore, with the help of an annual Commonwealth funding of approxiamately $1.4m HOME Advice Programs have been effective in preventing further homelessness, protecting individual rights and access, whilst nothing has been done to reduce the current homelessness. Although, that is not their objective.

The Reconnect program uses community-based early intervention services to assist young people aged 12 to 18 years who are homeless, or at risk of homelessness, and their families. Reconnect assists young people stabilize their living situation and improve their level of engagement with family, work, education, training and their local community. This is an effective area to target since 10% of all homeless people are between ages 12 and 18, and also if not helped will contribute to the more severe homelessness in older brackets. A 2015 review found that almost 90% of young people reported an overall improvement in their situation after being assisted by a Reconnect program. Therefore, this non-legal response is effective because it targets a vulnerable group and protects individual rights and provides greater access.

Ultimately, everyone has the right to shelter, and those who are homeless are being denied it. Therefore, the Australian Government and community must work to reduce homelessness. The NPAH has been effective in reducing homelessness, and so have the HOME Advice and Reconnect programs. Although, they all share the same restraint on funding, which limits their effectiveness.



#end Section-2
