#start Section-1

url2 url19 url29 url39 url49 url59
url69 url79 url89 url91

#end Section-1

#start Section-2


Andrew Taylor's Home Page - WARNING CONTENTS OLD & RARELY UPDATED

I'm a lecturer in the School of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of New South Wales .

I generally teach first & second year programming courses such as Software Construction and Computing 1A

Most of my research time is spent with building software and hardware which can recognise animal vocalisations in the field. Pretty pics below.

Contact Details

Andrew Taylor
School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of New South Wales
Sydney 2052
Australia
E-mail: andrewt@cse.unsw.edu.au
Phone: 61 2 9385-5525  Fax: 61 2 9385-5995

My office is K17 401G on Level 4 of the Computer Science
building which is next to UNSW's Barker St car park.
[My Photo]
Cane Toad Impact Project

With Gordon Grigg (UQ), Hamish McCallum (UQ), Graeme Watson (Melbourne Uni.) I've been involved in a long term study to measure what, if any, impact the arrival of the toads has on native frogs at site in Kakadu and the Roper River valley of Australia's Northern Territory. The study uses solar-powered computers with microphones. Machine learning-based software is used to automatically identify each of the calls of the 23 species of frogs found in the region. These computers operate untended for an entire year in hostile conditions. including cyclones, numerous storms, flooding, wet season heat & humidity, dry season fires and interference by wildlife and humans.
Cyclorana australis sonagram 
Cyclorana australis sonagram - click to hear its call   Cyclorana australis 
Cyclorana australis
Litoria wotjulumensis sonagram 
Litoria wotjulumensis sonagram - click to hear its call >Litoria wotjumulensis 
Litoria wotjumulensis
Our frog monitoring hardware 
Our frog monitoring hardware.   ne of our portable monitoring stations 
One of our portable monitoring stations.
Our Mamukala frog monitoring site at the end of the dry 
Our Mamukala frog monitoring site at the end of the dry checking the same site in the middle of the wet 
Gordon Grigg checking the same site in the middle of the wet.
Sunset at one of our Roper River monitoring sites 
Wet season sunset at one of our Roper River frog monitoring sites.  ne of our portable monitoring stations 
Another Roper River frog monitoring site in the dry.
Arnhemland fire at the end of the dry season 
Arnhemland fire at the end of the dry season    Early wet season storm over Sandy Billabong in Kakadu 
Early wet season storm over Sandy Billabong in Kakadu
Other Research

Some years ago I used NLP techniques to parse biological definitions. The intention was to automatically construct taxonomic knowledge bases which then could be used for identification programs and other purposes. Some of this work is avialable as html or gzipped postscript. This work is on hold. I hope to return to it some day.

My Sydney University PhD thesis was titled: Parma - A High Performance Prolog Implementation A summary paper is also available as html or gzipped postscript

#end Section-2
